DOCS: general overview of data tiers and roles (#63086)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/modules/datatiers.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[modules-tiers]]
=== Data tiers

Common data lifecycle management patterns revolve around transitioning the indices
through multiple collections of nodes with different hardware characteristics in order
to fulfil evolving CRUD, search, and aggregation needs as the indices age. The concept

> of a tiered hardware architecture is not new in {es}.

Author: That's a great point Lee. I believe the ILM section should advise on how to migrate. That said, I think mentioning/referencing the existing ILM tiered options/methods here is a nice bridge for that (with links going back and forth between the ILM guide and this page). 

I'm happy to drop it but I find it a nice bridge towards ILM and the tiered options it enables (with and without data tiers)

> of a tiered hardware architecture is not new in {es}.

Author: I've reworded the tiers definition to emphasise things like replicas etc should be configured and don't come as guarantees. Also reworded the data retention a bit to be a guideline.

Let me know if we should reword /remove more.

The node roles that can currently define data tiers are:

* <<data-content-node, data_content>>
* <<data-hot-node, data_hot>>
* <<data-warm-node, data_warm>>
* <<data-cold-node, data_cold>>

The more generic <<data-node, data role>> is not a data tier role, but
it is the default node role if no roles are configured. If a node has the
<<data-node, data>> role we will treat the node as if it has all of the tier
roles assigned.

[[content-tier]]
==== Content tier

The content tier is made of one or more nodes that have the <<data-content-node, data_content>>
role. A content tier is designed to store and search user created content. Non-timeseries data
doesn't necessarily follow the hot-warm-cold path. The hardware profiles are quite different to
the <<hot-tier, hot tier>>. User created content will prioritise high CPU to support complex
queries and aggregations in a timely manner, as opposed to the <<hot-tier, hot tier>> which
will prioritise high IO.
The content tier is a fast, higher cost, tier. The content data has very long data retention
characteristics and from a resiliency perspective the indices in this tier use one or more

> replicas.

Author: Thanks Lee, I struggled with this a bit and thought it's an important motivation for data tiers and should be included in the docs in order to illustrate the value and a way to reason about tiers. 

I understand your concerns but I do wonder if this kind of information would still have a place in our documentation in the form or recommendations/vision/purpose for each tier? (and underline the users can still place whatever nodes they want in each tier)

I'm otherwise a bit confused as to what sort of information should we provide for each tier, besides that it's a set of nodes with a particular role.

cold tier. The cold tier is still a reponsive query tier but as the data transitions into this
tier it can be compressed, shrunken, with zero replicas and backed by a <<ilm-searchable-snapshot, snapshot>>.
These tier features offer a huge opprotunity to make major cost savings. Data withing this tier
is retained for months and the indices have zero replicas as they are backed by a searchable
snapshot.

The tradeoff when moving data from Warm to Cold is writability for costs, with the search performance
remaining the same as in the Warm tier.

[[data-tier-allocation]]
=== Data tier index allocation

When an index is created {es} will automatically allocate the index to the <<content-tier, Content tier>>
if the index is not part of a <<data-streams, data stream> or to the <<hot-tier, Hot tier>> if the index
is part of a <<data-streams, data stream>>. The user created content will initially be allocated to the
Content tier which is designed and optimised for this type of data. Timeseries data (ie. data streams)
will initially be allocated to the Hot tier which offers high performance and is capable of efficiently

> ingesting large amounts of machine data (ie. logs, metrics) while also offering high query performance.

Reviewer: I think we get into too much detail about performance characteristics here. Instead I'd rather have a blurb about exactly what setting is set by default (`index.routing.allocation.include._tier_preference`) and how to unset it or override it as mentioned below

These heuristics can be overridden by specifying any <<shard-allocation-filtering, shard allocation filtering>>
settings in the create index request or index template that matches the new index.

[[data-tier-migration]]
=== Data tier index migration

> <<index-lifecycle-management, Index Lifecycle Management>> is automating the transition of the managed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<<index-lifecycle-management, Index Lifecycle Management>> automates the transition of managed
```

Reviewer: We'll link to the migrate action here once we have ILM documentation for it
